Shabbat Shalom everybody.

Shabbat Shalom.

It's a couple of minutes after 7 o'clock on a Friday night here in Bowie, Maryland.

We're coming to you live from inside the sanctuary at Temple Sollel.

A warm, that's a key word for tonight, and welcoming reform congregation here in Bowie.

I'm Rabbi Steve Wiseman.

I use he and us pronouns.

And I will be your tour guide tonight.

I am thankful to be joined by Linda, who for once is sitting by herself on the other side.

We'll help her to get through.

She will help us to sing.

It'll be a beautiful symbiotic relationship this evening.

Thank you to Leon, who's allowing those of you who are joining us on the feed to be part of us.

We welcome you as always.

I say this frequently, but it's always true.

Broadcasting services live is one of the great acts of faith I have ever participated in in my life.

You all can see me.

I take it on faith that you're watching.

I can't see you back. It's the truth.

We are going to be praying tonight on this Shabbat.

Fortify those of us who are here by some really good food at the Sip and Snack before we began.

We have just passed some interesting dates on the calendar.

We have some more interesting ones coming.

We'll talk about those a little bit more later.

But for now, we're going to begin with an opening melody.

I Did He Die.

I-did-e

lie lie lie lie lie lie lie lie lie I did he die did he die die die die die die die die die die

I did he die did he die I did he die did he die die die die die die die die die die I did he die

did he die?

We continue turning to pages two and three

in our prayer books for the lighting of Shabbat candles.

We invite forward Elisa Klein to lead us.

as these shabbat candles give light to all who behold them so may we by our lives give light to

all who behold us. As their brightness reminds us of the generations of Israel who have kindled light,

so may we in our own day be among those who kindle light.

Paruch atah Adonai, Eloheinu melech ha'olam,

Blessed are you, Adonai our God,

sovereign of the universe,

who hallows us with mitzvot,

commanding us to kindle the light of Shabbat.

Amen.

Before we continue with the Kiddush for Shabbat evening, we pause for a moment.

To unstick the Kiddush cup.

To acknowledge those who in our community are celebrating simchas, joyous events, tonight and in the upcoming week.

for those simchas that we can plot on our calendars, things like birthdays, anniversaries, what have you.

Those who have just perhaps been surprised by a simcha and celebrated it

and will be sharing all the good news with us at the Oneg afterwards.

Among those we know celebrating tonight and throughout the upcoming week,

Natalie Alter, Jim Wymer, Michelle Ordway, Elaine Hinkle, Bob Stern, Sherry Endo, and Henry Tucker,

all celebrating birthdays.

It's my privilege as the rabbi of this community,

with the faith and trust that you have put in me for 26 years

as your leader, to ask God's blessing for all of us

celebrating simchas in the words of our tradition.

Yivarechecha Adonai v'yishmarecha,

may God bless us all and keep us.

Ya'er Adonai panavelecha v'ichu neka,

may God's countenance shine upon us and be gracious to us.

Yissa Adonai panavei lecha veyasem lecha shalom.

May God look upon us now.

Smiling always.

Grant us the greatest of gifts, contentment and wholeness,

fulfillment and peace, the gift of true shalom.

And let us all say, Amen.

Amen.

On pages four and five, we prepare to recite the Kiddush for Shabbat together.

I invite you to rise physically and spiritually as you are able,

as David Newman comes forward to lead us.

The heaven and the earth were finished

and all their array.

On the seventh day, God finished the work

that God had been doing,

and God ceased on the seventh day

from all the work that God had done.

And God blessed the seventh day

and declared it holy,

because on it, God ceased from all the work of creation

that God had done.

Baruch at Adonai,

Eloheinu melech olam,

Amen.

Baruch atah Adonai,

mekatesh,

hashabat,

Amen.

We remain standing as we turn to page 22 in our prayer books.

A song for Shabbat.

It is good to praise, Adonai, to sing hymns to your name, O Most High, to proclaim your

steadfast love at daybreak, your faithfulness each night, with a ten-stringed harp, with

voice and lyre.

You have gladdened me by your deeds, Adonai.

I shout for joy at your handiwork.

How great are your works, how very subtle your designs.

A brute cannot know, a fool cannot understand this.

Together, the righteous bloom like a date palm.

They thrive like a cedar in Lebanon.

Planted in the house of Adonai, they flourish in the courts of our God.

In old age, they still produce fruit.

They are full of sap and freshness, attesting that Adonai is upright.

My rock in whom there is no wrong.

Pages 28 and 29, we continue with the call to worship.

The Baruch Hu.

O God, you are as near as the very air we breathe,

yet farther than the farthest star.

We yearn to reach you.

We seek the light and warmth of your presence.

Though we say you are near, we are lonely and alone together.

Oh, let our desire be so strong

that it will tear the veil that keeps you from our sight.

Let your light release our darkness

and reveal the glory and joy of your presence.

"Beruchata Adonai, Eloheinu, Melech HaOlam,

asher be-dvaro ma'ari v'aravim,

v'chokma ha'potach sh'arim,

v'v'tvunah m'shane itim,

v'machalif et hazmanim,

v'mesadar et ha'kochavim,

v'meshmerotahem barakia k'yirtsono.

"The day and night is filled with light from the light and light from the light.

"And the day and night is filled with light and with light.

As you taught Torah to those whose names I bear,

teach me Torah too.

Its mystery beckons, yet I struggle with its truth together.

You meant Torah for me.

Did you mean the struggle for me too?

Don't let me struggle alone.

Help me to understand, to be wise, to listen, to know.

Lead me into the mystery.

Baruch atah Adonai, Ohev amoh Yisrael.

Shema Yisrael Adonai Eloheinu Adonai Echad

Hear, O Israel, Adonai is our God, Adonai is one.

Blessed is God's glorious majesty forever and ever.

You may be seated.

.

In a world torn by violence and pain, a world far from wholeness and peace, give us the courage

to say, Adonai, there is one God in heaven and earth. The high heavens declare your glory. May

earth reveal your justice and love. From bondage in Egypt we were delivered. At Sinai we bound

ourselves to your way. Inspired by prophets and instructed by sages, time and again we overcame

oppressive forces. Though our failings are many and our faults are great, it has been our glory to

bear witness to our God. Keeping alive in dark ages your vision of a world redeemed, let us continue

to work for the day when the nations shall be one and at peace.

Then shall we rejoice as Israel did, singing on the shores of the sea.

piano plays softly

B'cham mocha, ko'eli madonai.

B'cham mocha, ne'evad ro'ed.

No ra, teri loj, o sefele.

O ra te hilot, o se fele.

.

Adonai, give him love, le'olam phaed.

Adonai, give him love, le'olam phaed.

V'nei mar kifado, Adonai ad Yaakov, uglomiyat chazok mimeinu.

Baruch ato Adonai, go al Yisrael.

Let there be love and understanding among us.

Let peace and friendship be our shelter from life's storms.

Adonai, help us to walk with good companions,

to live with hope in our hearts and eternity in our thoughts,

that we may lie down in peace and rise up waiting to do your will.

Baruch Atah Adonai,

haporei sukat shalom aleinu,

ve'al kol amol Yisrael,

ve'al Yerushalayim.

Thank you.

B'nei uvein b'nei Yisrael, ot hi'le olam, ot hi'le olam.

B'shamru b'nei Yisrael, et ha'shabat, la'sod et ha'shabat, l'dorotamberid olam.

Tishesh et yamim Asa Adonai et HaShamaim

V'et ha-vet, v'sham-ru, v'nei israel, et ha-shabbat, v'asod et ha-shabbat, fl'dorotamberi do-lam.

Uvayom ha-shvi'i, Uvayom ha-shvi'i, Shabbat v'inah fash.

Shabbat bayin avash, bishavru b'nei Yisrael, et ha-shabbat, la-sodeh ha-shabbat, l'in-do-lo-ta-feri-do-lam.

The people of Israel shall keep Shabbat.

Observing Shabbat throughout the ages is a covenant for all time.

It is a sign for all time between me and the people of Israel.

For in six days, Adonai made heaven and earth.

And on the seventh day, God ceased from the work and was refreshed.

Which brings us to pages 46 and 47.

The transition point in our worship,

a chance for us to prepare anew for what's coming now,

the second of the main portions of our worship.

A chance to dig down deep inside of ourselves, to prepare ourselves as the individuals we were when we came into this room,

and to allow that individual preparation to bring us together as a prayer community, as an extended family of worship,

seeking God together, praising God, thanking God, asking God for some really important things.

So we begin in silence, and then Linda and I will start to add a melody that will take us to asking God to open our lips in praise.

When your own individual preparation moves you to join in with the melody and the words, please do.

And when all of that has you moved to the point where you're ready to rise, whether it's physically or spiritually, please do, and we'll be ready when we all get there.

But for now, you prepare in silence.

Die, die, die, die, die, die, die.

A thought has blown the marketplace away.

There is a song on the wind and joy in the trees.

Shabbat has arrived in the world.

Scattering a song in the silence of the night, and eternity utters a day.

And eternity utters a day.

I don't know how I start time to come

O fi yagid tehillah techa

We pray as if everything depends upon God,

but let us act as if everything depends upon us.

Baruch atah Adonai Eloheinu

ve'lohei avotenu ve'imotenu

Elohei Avraham, Elohei Yitzhak,

Elohei Yaakov.

Elohei Sarah, Elohei Rivka, Elohei Rachel, Elohei Lea,

Ha'el, Hagadol, Hagibor, Ha'orah,

El Elyon, Komel, Chassadim, Tovim,

Be'konei ha'kol, Be'zokher, Chassay, Avot, V'ymahot,

Um'v'i, G'ulal, Yv'nei, V'nei, Hem, L'm'an, Sh'mo, Be'ahava,

מלך עוזר ומושיה ומגין, ברוך אתה אדוני, מגין אברהם ועזרת שרה.

אתה גיבור לעולם אדוני, מחייה הכל אתה רב להושיה, משיב הרוח ומוריד הגשם.

מחלקל חיים בחסד, מחיי הכל ברחמים רבים, סומך נופים ורפי חולים ומתיר עשורים ומחיים אמונתו משנה יפהר, מי חמוך בעל גבורות ומידו מלאף, מלך מימית ומחיי, המתמיח ישועה.

V'neeman ata lahachayot hakol,

Baruchata Adonai,

mechaye hakol.

Atah Kadosh,

v'shimcha Kadosh,

v'kiddoshim v'chol yom

yahalalucha,

t'sela.

Baruchata Adonai,

a'el hakadosh,

days pass and the years vanish.

And we walk sightless among miracles.

O God, fill our eyes with seeing

and our minds with knowing.

let there be moments when your presence, like lightning,

illuminates the darkness in which we walk.

Help us to see wherever we gaze that the bush burns unconsumed,

and we, mere clay touched by God,

will reach out for holiness and exclaim and wonder,

how filled with awe is this place?

And we did not know it.

You may be seated.

Please join me in the English at the top of page 55.

May these hours of rest and renewal open our hearts to joy and our minds to truth.

May all who struggle find rest on this day.

May all who suffer find solace.

May all who hurt find healing on this day.

May all who despair find purpose.

May all who hunger find fulfillment on this day.

And may this day fulfill its promise.

Baruch atah Adonai,

Hekadesh HaShabbat.

You are with us in our prayer,

in our love and our doubt,

in our longing to feel your presence and do your will.

You are the still clear voice within us together.

Therefore, O God, when doubt troubles us,

when anxiety makes us tremble,

when pain clouds the mind,

we look inward for the answer to our prayers.

There may we find you,

and there find courage, insight, and endurance.

And let our worship bring us closer to one another.

That all Israel and all who seek you may find new strength for your service.

Baruch atah Adonai, she'otcha levadcha, v'yirah na'avor.

God of goodness.

We give thanks for the gift of life, wonder beyond words, for the awareness of soul, our

light within, for the world around us so filled with beauty, for the richness of the earth

which day by day sustains us.

For all these and more we offer thanks.

Baruch atah Adonai,

atov shimcha,

lecha na'eh lehodot.

Amen.

is

Shalom, la'v'o Yisrael am'chav

Tashim le'olam

Tashim le'olam

Tashim le'olam

Please join me at the top of the page.

grant us peace, your most precious gift, O eternal source of peace, and give us the will

to proclaim its message to all the peoples of the earth.

Bless our country as a safeguard of peace, its advocate among the nations.

May contentment reign within our borders, health and happiness within our homes.

Strengthen the bonds of friendship and fellowship among all the inhabitants of every land.

Plant virtue in every soul, and may the love of your name hallow every home and every heart.

Praised are you, Eternal One, who blesses our people with peace.

Baruch atah Adonai, amvarei chetamo Yisrael, bashalom.

And just as we began in the silence of preparation and hope, we conclude the Amidah tonight in the silence of hope.

hope that the prayers that reside within our individual hearts and souls,

stubbornly refusing to allow us to put words on them and release them in the traditional way,

might be heard anyway as we offer them now together, silently.

We reach for you, our God, from our quiet places.

May we stand still for a brief moment and listen to the rain.

Stand still for a brief moment and watch the play of sunlight and shadow on the leaves.

For a brief moment, listen to the world.

Let us stop the wheels of every day to be aware of Shabbat.

Find stillness of the sanctuary which the soul cherished.

Renew the covenant of an ancient people.

Adonai Turi

Adonai Turi

Beguali

Adonai Turi

Beguali

We come now to another one of those moments where we lift our heads out of the prayer

book. Look around to the real world around us, to our own homes, to our

communities, and see the need, the need for healing of body and soul, of spirit and

mind. Everything from the small inconvenient coughs and owies of the

winter months, to the bigger flus and RSVs and COVIDs and worse, to the concerns about

how bad might the weather be this weekend, or things far more important, the worries

about what's missing in our lives or in the world.

All of those we cover in a single remarkable prayer

that asks for healing, that asks for wholeness,

that asks for refuah shlema, a complete recovery,

a recovery of shlemut to wholeness.

The words are based on the traditional blessing,

translated and put to music by the remarkable Debbie Friedman.

I invite you to rise at your places physically and spiritually as you're able and join in with us on page 253 in the middle of the page.

Mishem Beirach

Avotenu

Mikor

Avotenu

May the source of strength

Who blessed the ones

Before us

Help us find the courage

To make our lives

the renewal of spirit,

and let us say,

Amen.

Please be seated.

This past Monday,

we Americans celebrated the life, teachings, and influence

of the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.

This coming Tuesday

is International Holocaust Remembrance Day.

Not the one we Jews necessarily observe,

but a remembrance nonetheless.

It actually came up in this afternoon's conversation.

Something as simple as picking a day for observing and remembering.

The International Holocaust Remembrance Day was selected

because it marks the day when the Auschwitz-Birkenau camp

was liberated by the Allied forces.

A perfectly wonderful day to remember something horrible.

But the Israelis had a different idea.

the Israelis said

if we're going to remember being victims in the Holocaust

we're tired of being victims

we're tired of being perceived as weak

the day they picked

was the day of the beginning of the Warsaw Ghetto uprising

which is why Yom HaShoah

is in the spring after Passover

two very legitimate choices

sending two very different

messages

And in between Dr. King's Day and Holocaust Remembrance Day,

we have been treated to a remarkable show

as an American president threatened to take Greenland by force

before backing down,

in which ICE continues to perform as if the people of Minneapolis are a foreign enemy.

And I got to speak earlier today to my friends at the Pure Learning Partnership History Group

at their invitation, this time about Gaza and the state of Israel.

24 hours after listening to our American president present his board of peace for Gaza.

So forgive me if somehow tonight I am approaching our Torah for this Shabbat from a lot of different, mostly larger than usual perspectives.

And that's even before I factor in the extra emphasis that I and we have been giving to the Haftarah this year.

and analyzing our words of Torah, thanks to our friend, Rabbi Barbara Simons,

in which she taught us when she was here a few months ago.

The portion for this Shabbat is bow.

The summary is surprisingly simple.

Last week's cliffhanger ending after the seventh plague is resolved.

We make it through plagues eight and nine.

Have what should be the last confrontation with Pharaoh.

Spoiler, it isn't.

Prepare for our first Seder meal.

Survive the 10th plague.

Receive far too many instructions for a rushed departure.

And then barely begin the Exodus.

Leaving most of the actual exodizing for next week.

Thank God, I thought I was going to coin that word and nobody would notice.

And through it all, as we have now done for these last two weeks, we are asked to deal with a particularly troubling bit of Torah that repeats over and over again.

As we are told yet again that God, instead of encouraging Pharaoh to let us go, which was assuredly within God's range of possibilities, instead once again hardens Pharaoh's heart.

We as modern readers are never fully sure of what exactly that means,

but the impact is never in doubt.

Through nine previous plagues, the heartening of Pharaoh's heart condemns the Egyptian public

to more plagues and more suffering.

Each heartening allowed another escalation of the pain,

until now we are told all of Egypt's firstborn male children lie dead in front of their families,

presumably including, if not Pharaoh himself, then probably his son and heir.

Now, I don't know about all of you,

but tonight the last thing I want to have to explain after the past week

is something that looks like it might be militarized Jewish extremist apologetics

in explaining a critical moment of our people's core story.

And right here in the story, by the way, I skipped a couple of choice words

that point out that the Jewish extremist apologetics

in saying that God hardened Pharaoh's heart

are more than balanced off right now in the world

by rampant militarized myopic Christian nationalism

and the appearance of militarized Muslim extremism in the Middle East.

We've all got them.

Let's acknowledge it.

And we all have to learn to deal with our own.

And right here in the story,

with our ancestors ready to get out of town in a hurry,

the last thing I need is any more muscle flexing,

even in support of our God who is freeing us.

We should be grateful, and we are,

But right now in our world, we need this muscle flexing like we need a hole in the head.

But what else do we get?

At the end of the same chapter that we read this week,

that begins with God giving Moses the instructions to share with the people

about taking the lamb and holding it so it can be sacrificed at the appropriate time

and the blood used to be put on the lintel so that the angel of death will pass over

and we will not be wiped out with all of Egypt.

Those instructions were given by God to Moses

to give to the people at least five days

before the night of the angel of death.

On the 10th day of the month, tell them to hold it till the 14th.

Means that God was telling it to Moses no later than the 9th of the month.

By the way, later in that same chapter that we read this week,

we're told for the first of several times

that in future years and throughout the generations

when we remember this day of passing over,

we will mark it by eating unleavened bread

because our ancestors didn't have enough time

to let the bread rise properly.

I'm calling read your own text.

it's not what I want to call but it's a sermon

if we had at least five days to hold on to the lamb

we had enough time to prepare the bread

and it's not something that the tradition teaches us

it's right there in the text in the same chapter

what do we modern liberal Jews do

reading a text with that blatant and inconsistency

particularly in the world today.

And making it worse at the end of the same chapter.

I love this chapter. I really do.

We are told that the people had already followed

Moses' earlier instruction,

even though this is the first time we're hearing of it at this moment,

to ask our Egyptian neighbors if we could

borrow, it's the word in the Hebrew, there's no translating it differently,

all manners of gems and valuables

on our way out. When we knew we were leaving

and it looks to all the world like our timing was designed to extort

reparations in their moment of abject fear for their lives and encouraging

us to leave now before it gets any worse.

I want, I need, our world

needs clarity. That the people that is about to

reenter the Council of Free Nations after leaving our Egyptian servitude,

our ancestors, my ancestors, are starting their

free peoplehood on a foundation of morality and concerns for

others. Not by borrowing their gems

with no intention of returning them on the way out of town.

And we get pretty much the exact opposite.

No wonder God makes sure that our first stop after our escape at the sea is at Sinai,

where we can finally get that moral guidance we need.

But now, and until we get to Sinai, yikes.

So how can I, how can we even begin to make sense of this?

It's not easy.

But I feel like we have to try.

It's there. We've got to acknowledge it.

Others are reading it, assuming that we are okay with it.

How about we start here?

Ten plagues.

Yet another opportunity for God to give us the example

that we will eventually use when we come to define the minimum quorum needed for public prayer.

Ten plagues is what it took to convince Egypt to let us go.

Ten can represent our entire community in terms of strength.

The argument is easily made.

It's not the one the rabbis chose.

Another possible explanation for a minion rejected by the rabbis of old.

It's almost as if they want nothing to do with these stories

in establishing their own new set of moral expectations

any more than we want to try to explain them to a modern audience.

Or maybe we start here with Jeremiah.

who contributes the Haftarah for the Shabbat, by the way,

and those same rabbis who decided that this week's Haftarah

should come from Jeremiah,

where Jeremiah goes in the Haftarah for the Shabbat

reminding us that the reason for the plagues

was not merely to get our ancestors out of the servitude in Egypt,

but also to establish the dominance of our single god

over the pantheon of Egyptian gods,

each individually and all of them collectively.

So God's dominance had to be repeated over and over

each time another plague took down another Egyptian god.

And in the process, the cumulative impact on the Egyptians

would turn them against Pharaoh's policies.

God wasn't really hardening Pharaoh's heart for the sake of making things worse

or providing an excuse to take down another Egyptian god.

Pharaoh became the substitute

who suffered and made others suffer

with each defeat.

And if that seems far-fetched,

if that is the intent of the text,

then God needs to show strength and do so at the expense of Pharaoh,

who is one of those God figures of Egypt.

Over and over again, I'm not so sure.

I know I don't like it, but I think I understand it.

A little.

So allow me the fantasy of seeing it this way.

Because that strength must be manifest.

The authors of the text, losing sight of the optics and other truths,

overplayed their hand.

And had God directly and personally continually force Pharaoh's hand by hardening his heart.

I can live with that.

Human error.

And our humans, we can own that.

And if it seems far-fetched, let me ask you this.

Is it far-fetched to assume a human agent, maybe an ICE agent, I don't know,

whether because he fears his strength is not being taken seriously enough,

or because he believes his anonymity behind a mask and the promises of immunity he has heard allow him to get away with whatever he wants,

might choose to confront a 37-year-old nursery school mom in her family vehicle to earn points with colleagues and superiors.

It might have been far-fetched a couple of weeks ago.

I'm not sure it is anymore.

And might those supporters in writing about his actions as supporters glorify and overstate his actions to further their impact?

It's the same answer, isn't it?

We're living in a world in which this officer is not even under investigation by our federal government.

But the woman he killed and the mayor and the governor who demanded the right to run their own investigation of his actions,

all are being investigated right now.

Let that sink in.

And I'm sorry.

But if we are not more uncomfortable about that

than we are about some obvious exaggeration

in a 3,000-year-old partisan myth about our God

taking down the gods of our oppressors,

then shame on us.

In fact, the lessons this story is supposed to teach

are exactly the ones we would appear to have lost

if what's happening in Minnesota right now

doesn't bother us enough.

So yes, I am grateful tonight

for a Torah that challenges me.

even sometimes in less than ideal ways

and forces me to get to a place

where our core values finally kick back in.

I am grateful for Jeremiah

who I did not understand as a bar mitzvah boy

and still don't sometimes as a grown-up rabbi

for reminding us of what matters

even when the Torah might appear to forget at times.

I'm grateful that Brother Martin

who we celebrated earlier this week

knew the words of Jeremiah

and wasn't afraid to quote him and them,

to make sure that we might all see the day when they both spoke,

the day when justice will roll down like waters,

righteousness as a mighty stream.

And I'm grateful for opportunities,

both inside my own house and in the outside world,

to teach the truth of our history and our Torah,

so that the dream might come closer to fruition.

And if all of that means that reaching the promised land,

whether of our ancestors or of freedom,

and our taking steps in the right direction towards it

are delayed for another week,

then at the very least we get one more chance this week

to teach and learn something of value

from our own texts or Martins or anyone else's

that has something useful and important to say on the subject.

Along the way to a passage to freedom that cannot and will not be forestalled forever,

but for which we can still better prepare ourselves and those with whom we travel to get better results.

Because the bottom line is that we, because of what happened to our ancestors in Egypt so long ago,

have the privilege, and I use that word deliberately, and also the responsibility,

to use our experience, the lessons we have learned from it, to help others.

So let me leave you with words I learned this week, unattributed on social media, as too often they are,

and honestly didn't have the time to look up to see if I could reconnect them to their original speaker.

Privilege is being able to wonder if it is your fight to fight.

Empathy is knowing that if someone is hurting, it already is.

For me, it really doesn't matter if it is in response to an overzealous shooting of a civilian by an overprotected and mispositioned officer,

or the political silence that condones it and seeks to make those speaking out in response appear guilty,

or the response to a synagogue arson, or teaching my neighbors the history and facts of the Gazan situation,

My privilege tells me it is my fight, at least to support,

because my empathy shows me the very real pain that must be acknowledged and made whole.

As we get ready to cross the sea, let us see our path clearly.

Let us be unconcerned by the appearance of obstacles.

Let us be nachschon, of whom we will speak more next week.

Let us work together with faith to overcome.

And once we have crossed to safety, to freedom, to peace,

may we not forget the lessons of that experience

and continue to be as committed, as involved,

until everyone can enjoy the freedoms and privileges

that we sometimes forget and take for granted.

Kenehiratsun. May it be God's will. Amen.

it is now my privilege

to invite forward my friend

my neighbor

our executive vice president

heir to the throne

Deb Ainoff

for a few words of Shabbat greeting

and some announcements

Shabbat Shalom everyone

I try really hard to make connections, but tonight I have to tell you my world, as many

of you know, has been chaotic in our schools with this impending blizzard, snowstorm, a

week off, a day off.

And so instead of making connections, I just want to take a few minutes to first thank

you for coming tonight.

The blizzard has not started.

There is no snow outside, so all of you at home, I appreciate you logging in to see us tonight.

We are all safe and warm here, and I thank you for coming.

Linda, thank you for your beautiful voice and for singing tonight.

Leon, thank you for making it possible for those that didn't want to come out in the cold.

Tomorrow will be colder.

For at least logging on and being able to see us.

JR, thank you for ushering.

We appreciate that.

And before you leave, as I always say, having an officer outside is something that we are privileged to have.

And therefore, I'd ask that you just thank him on your way out.

Because sometimes our officers just don't get enough praise for the things that they do.

And he keeps us safe here.

Our own egg is sponsored by Donna Boggess, Irene Engel, Stefan, and Jen Niedenbach.

And thank you to Elisa for our candles and David for our kiddush.

I do want to take a moment because most of you came to the most beautiful sip and snack

this evening.

So thanks to our membership committee for doing that.

Elisa, thank you for leading that and for finding ways for us to engage using our privilege

of having the Rubin Trust.

And so because of that trust, we were able to do some of these things.

Thank you to Michelle Slaney and her awesome husband, Mark, who set up, who coordinate,

who organize, and who make sure that we are all enjoying ourselves.

Without you, we wouldn't have the sip and snack in these different ideas.

So thank you for that.

And more than anything, I want people to know that that's how we're using our trust sometimes.

The trust was used specifically to help with coordinating and for some of our programming.

And so that was our programming and our board who decided we wanted to get a little bit more engagement.

And so thank you to those of you who attended and who organized.

Now let me get to the real things.

After I get through all these emails that say we're going to close Monday, let me get to the real stuff.

So first and foremost, tomorrow morning we are having our hybrid Haftarah study and book of Ecclesiastes.

I can't say it.

It's just one of those words I can't do.

But we have made the decision to close on Sunday,

so there will be no religious school, no Torah for tots.

Make sure that you share that if you have somebody who is not watching tonight.

We will not be open that day.

We also wanted to talk a little bit about some upcoming things.

We do have a Temple Sol Elk Congregational Asian-themed Potluck Shabbat,

and that's January 30th, and so we would ask that you would RSVP by the 27th, and this is all in

this week's news, so if you don't remember it, you can just go to that. We actually have a special

opportunity to partner with Prince George's Community College for our congregants ages 60

and older, and it's time to sign up now. It's a daytime class offering for our older adults

beginning in February.

We need eight people in order to make it happen,

and this is another program we're trying

in order to engage different members and different ages.

So we would ask that if you're interested in there,

it is in this week's news.

If you're interested and you're here tonight,

Elisa is here in case she can answer any questions for you.

There's another movie night.

If you loved Bad Shabbos, as my sister-in-law loved it,

Mark your calendars next month, Saturday, February 7th.

We're watching Keeping the Faith, and we'll also have a Cats movie.

The big thing that the board is looking forward to, and we hope that you all come, is an adult

Purim Carnival.

New to us this year, mark your calendars, but we are going to have an adult Purim Carnival

on February 20th.

Purim Party.

It's an adult party, which tells me there'll be adult-themed cocktails and food and drink.

And so it's Saturday, February 28th.

And again, trying different things.

I just want to leave you with we have many, many, many congregants that span through Prince

George's County, Anne Arundel County, all of our counties.

So I wish you well.

I know that regardless of what you think, we are getting a storm.

And so I would hope that you would stay safe, stay warm,

and if you need something, don't hesitate to call a board member or the rabbi.

We won't be able to get to you right away,

but we will be able to help with resources if there is a need.

So once again, we hope that you stay safe and warm,

and we thank you for coming tonight.

And to our new members or to our prospective members,

welcome and thank you for being here with us.

I don't take audience questions.

they are gr a super bowl squares go ahead okay this was a one-man show i thought here

god you know what i thought i was going to talk about the super bowl squares

every year I knew we should talk about that

$150 for the end of the game.

And it costs $10 for one square, and it costs $25 for two squares.

Three.

Three squares.

And just how fast it's going.

We've been doing this since 2000.

And now fast it's going.

Right now, there are 12 empty squares.

And the way I work at this, the way it's going to work, you can say you're going to give me the money until you give me the money.

And somebody else is giving me the money, take it square.

You can be a winner on the February 8th.

We get in the American Hall with it.

And I'll call you or email it.

So I promise you I'll get it as soon as possible.

Please buy the last 12 squares.

I guarantee by next week the media will be done.

I'm counting on it.

We turn back in our prayer books.

You remember our prayer books.

To the bottom of page 282, we rise once again physically and spiritually as we are able to recite the Elenu.

We continue together at the top of page 287.

May we gain wisdom in our lives, overflowing like a river with understanding.

Love each of us for the peace we bring to others.

May our deeds exceed our speech.

May we never lift up our hand, but to conquer fear and doubt and despair.

Rise up like the sun, O God, over all humanity.

Cause light to go forth over all the lands between the seas.

Light up the universe with the joy of wholeness, of freedom, and of peace.

V'neema, v'hoya, ad'noi, l'mel'et al-hol'et,

Bayom ha'hu, bayom ha'hu, yiyeh Adonai echad,

u'shemau, u'shemau, u'shemau echad.

It is a fearful thing to love what death can touch,

a fearful thing to love, to hope, to dream, to be,

To be and owe to lose.

A thing for fools this and a holy thing.

A holy thing to love.

For your life has lived in me.

Your laugh once lifted me.

Your word was gift to me.

To remember this brings a painful joy.

Tis a human thing love, a holy thing.

To love what death has touched.

On this Shabbat, our thoughts turn to those who have departed this earth, our own loved ones, those whom our friends and neighbors have lost, the martyrs of our people whose graves are unmarked, and those of every race and nation whose lives have been a blessing to humanity.

As we remember them, we meditate on the meaning of love and loss, of life and death.

As a congregation, we continue to mourn the recent passing of Alan Robinson, Marilyn Orlin, Ronald Schneider, Mary Waldron, Connie Libman.

Gratefully, I can finally confirm

Connie's funeral will be Tuesday at 11 at Sacred Heart

and Wednesday evening at 7, weather permitting.

We will gather here in our collective living room

to sit Shiva with Len

and to help him in his hour of pain and of loss.

On the Shabbat, we also remember the Yartzites

of Gustav Bromberg, Nathan Ellis,

Rose Thorman, Serena Yankinson, Philip Barron, Morris Goeller, Janet Gould, Isabel Levin.

May all of their memories be for blessing.

As we join our voices together, those who rise as mourners, those who are standing in support of the mourners,

and those who are standing to remember the ones who have no one else left to remember.

Page 294, we praise God's name.

Yikadal v'yikadash sh'me rabba, v'alma divrach irutei v'yamlich malchutei, v'cha'yichon v'yomechon, v'cha'yedichol v'yisrael, v'agalav v'zman kariv v'yameru, amin.

Yeheish Shlama Rabbah Min Shmaya

May the source of peace send peace to all who mourn, comfort to all who are bereaved, and let us all say, Amen.

You may be seated.

the words to our closing hymn tonight

can be found in our prayer books at the bottom

page 353

a song of our hope for peace

and in its own way

may provide us a hint of the path it takes

to get there

Ud Yevoshalom Aleinu, Salaam.

Shalom Alelu

O devotee Shalom Alelu

O devotee Shalom Alelu

Nea Fulam Salaam

Alelu Rea Fulam Salaam

Odevo Shalom

who brings forth from the earth everything we need to make challah

and then trusts us and endows us with the skill and the experience

to make it good, to make it beautiful,

to send a message with it about bread being more than just bread,

a message about how our lives, like the braids of the challah,

are all intertwined.

And as we journey together,

we need to remember not only what we need in search for,

but that which our traveling partners

seek for themselves as well.

Eloheinu veloheia votenu vimotenu,

our God and God of our ancestors.

Makor birchotenu, source of our blessing,

it is easy on nights like this to stop,

to feel your presence, to recognize

the gifts with which you have already graced us to stop

and to offer our joyous thanks

and appreciation.

In the days ahead, O God, we ask for strength, strength to make that same recognition

when it isn't so obvious, when it isn't so easy.

Strength to look within ourselves on the good days and say

thank you, and on the difficult days to say

I've got this

and to carry on.

Strength to find those good traveling partners

who can help guide our steps

when we need the help

and who'll take direction

when we need to lead.

Strength to make the world better

not only for ourselves

but for all who seek

something better in their lives.

Strength to bring us closer to you

closer to each other

closer to the best that is within each of us.

And if we are worthy of that gift of strength, O God,

and if you dare to give us the wisdom

to use it that wisely,

then we pray it won't be long after,

if not us or our grandchildren, maybe their grandchildren,

when at long last the millennial prayer and dream comes true

to be able to be the generation to experience true shalom in all its forms.

Amen.

Shabbat Shalom.

Shabbat Shalom.

